Recap: What did Johnson say in his evidence?
We'll be bringing our live coverage to a close shortly so here's a summary of the key points from Boris Johnson's evidence to the Privileges Committee and what else we've learned today:
In his written submission, Johnson accepts he misled MPs in his statements to Parliament where he said Covid rules and guidance had been followed completely at No 10
However, he argues he did not "intentionally or recklessly mislead" the Commons because his statements were made "in good faith" and on the basis of what he believed at the time
Johnson also claims he corrected the record "at the earliest opportunity" - something the committee has previously disputed
He argues it was "reasonable" for him to rely on assurances from his advisers that the rules were followed
He rejects the committee's suggestion that it should have been "obvious" to him that Covid guidance was breached because he attended some of the gatherings himself
If this was the case, Johnson argues it would also have been "obvious" to others but he says the vast majority of those who gave evidence to the committee did not believe they had broken the rules
He also attempts to discredit the committee's interim report, describing it as "highly partisan"
The committee says Johnson's submission contains "no new documentary evidence"
Earlier, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak confirmed MPs will get a free vote on any sanctions recommended for Johnson.
And here is our write up of the day.
The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice UK group says it is "sickening" that Boris Johnson claimed he acted in "good faith" while accepting he misled the House of Commons over Partygate.

Writing on Twitter the group says it is "obvious that Boris Johnson deliberately misled Parliament and should resign as an MP".

It adds: "Far worse though is the lies he deliberately told to bereaved families, after failing to protect our loved ones. His claim that he did so in 'good faith' is sickening."

Meanwhile, a woman whose father died with Covid-19 early in the pandemic says Johnson's latest defence continues to highlight "his lack of shame and humility".

Kathryn de Prudhoe, a psychotherapist from Leeds, says her father Tony Clay died alone in April 2020 and had five people at his funeral.

Speaking about Johnson's defence, she says: "I feel utterly insulted at the obfuscation used to avoid accountability and the subtle yet obvious attempt to paint himself as a victim of people who were out to get him."
Who are the key characters in Johnson's dossier?
As well as Dominic Cummings several other names feature in Boris Johnson’s evidence to the Privileges Committee.

Martin Reynolds

Martin Reynolds served as Johnson's principal private secretary and featured heavily in reporting of Partygate. In May 2020, during lockdown, he emailed about 100 Downing Street staff inviting them along to socially distanced drinks outdoors.

In Johnson's evidence, the former PM says No 10 went to "great lengths to follow" Covid guidance under the direction of Reynolds. Johnson cites his former principal private secretary as someone who believed the events happening were work events.
Lee Cain served as Downing Street director of communications, and his leaving do on 13 November 2020 is one of the events Johnson addresses.

Johnson says on that occasion he "made a short speech, and left after approximately 15 minutes".

Cain is also referred to in Johnson's evidence in relation to the event on 20 May 2020, when Johnson says "Lee Cain has also raised the possibility that he raised a concern with me, although he has said that he does not recall if he did so".

Jack Doyle

Someone who gets extensive mention in the report is Jack Doyle, the former Downing Street director of communications.

It has previously been reported that Doyle made a speech to 20 or 30 people and handed out prizes at a Downing Street party just prior to Christmas 2020.

In his evidence, Johnson says it was Doyle who first made him aware of the Partygate stories ahead of their publication in the Daily Mirror in November 2021. He says when he was told there had been a party at No 10 in December 2020, he thought it was "some kind of try-on".

"It seemed implausible to me that there could have been an illegal event at No 10 almost a year earlier that I had not heard about before," he says.

"Nonetheless, I asked Jack Doyle about the event, which he confirmed he had attended."
Boris Johnson's former chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, has accused him of "misinformation" in relation to his account of a gathering in the Downing Street garden in May 2020.

Writing on his blog, Cummings repeats his claims the then-PM was told by himself and another adviser, Lee Cain, that the gathering "seemed clearly outside the rules".

In his submission, Johnson insists no-one expressed any concerns to him at the time about whether the event complied with Covid rules or guidance.

Cummings also references a line from a Times article that Johnson had rejected his claims the gathering was against the rules.

"This is not just obviously false, it's further misinformation from him," he writes.

"Officials were fined therefore the cops concluded it was against the rules, as [Lee] Cain and I warned that morning, and which is referred to in emails given to Sue Gray."

As we reported earlier, Johnson has argued Cummings should not be treated as a "credible witness" because of his "animosity towards me".
Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer says he hasn't yet seen the evidence from Boris Johnson to the Privileges Committee that has been published today.

Starmer says it is for the committee to conduct their investigation.

He was speaking at a press conference in London following the publication of a report into the Met police (follow our coverage here).
One of the key things the committee investigating Boris Johnson is looking at is how long it took him to correct some of his statements to Parliament.

This is known as "correcting the record". Each year around 100 written corrections are made by ministers who have inadvertently misled Parliament.

Boris Johnson says he corrected the record at "the earliest opportunity at which I could make the necessary correction", which, he says, was after the publication of Sue Gray's report into Downing Street gatherings on 25 May 2022.

That was almost six months after his statements about Covid rules and guidance being followed "at all times" had been made.

The committee said in its interim report that it wanted to know why "instead of correcting the record at the earliest opportunity, he declined to answer questions that were within his direct knowledge".

It said that it should have been obvious to Johnson that not all the guidance was being followed at events that he attended. Johnson disputes this.