Recap: What did Johnson say in his evidence?
We'll be bringing our live coverage to a close shortly so here's a summary of the key points from Boris Johnson's evidence to the Privileges Committee and what else we've learned today:
In his written submission, Johnson accepts he misled MPs in his statements to Parliament where he said Covid rules and guidance had been followed completely at No 10
However, he argues he did not "intentionally or recklessly mislead" the Commons because his statements were made "in good faith" and on the basis of what he believed at the time
Johnson also claims he corrected the record "at the earliest opportunity" - something the committee has previously disputed
He argues it was "reasonable" for him to rely on assurances from his advisers that the rules were followed
He rejects the committee's suggestion that it should have been "obvious" to him that Covid guidance was breached because he attended some of the gatherings himself
If this was the case, Johnson argues it would also have been "obvious" to others but he says the vast majority of those who gave evidence to the committee did not believe they had broken the rules
He also attempts to discredit the committee's interim report, describing it as "highly partisan"
The committee says Johnson's submission contains "no new documentary evidence"
Earlier, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak confirmed MPs will get a free vote on any sanctions recommended for Johnson.
And here is our write up of the day.
The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice UK group says it is "sickening" that Boris Johnson claimed he acted in "good faith" while accepting he misled the House of Commons over Partygate.

Writing on Twitter the group says it is "obvious that Boris Johnson deliberately misled Parliament and should resign as an MP".

It adds: "Far worse though is the lies he deliberately told to bereaved families, after failing to protect our loved ones. His claim that he did so in 'good faith' is sickening."

Meanwhile, a woman whose father died with Covid-19 early in the pandemic says Johnson's latest defence continues to highlight "his lack of shame and humility".

Kathryn de Prudhoe, a psychotherapist from Leeds, says her father Tony Clay died alone in April 2020 and had five people at his funeral.

Speaking about Johnson's defence, she says: "I feel utterly insulted at the obfuscation used to avoid accountability and the subtle yet obvious attempt to paint himself as a victim of people who were out to get him."
Who are the key characters in Johnson's dossier?
As well as Dominic Cummings several other names feature in Boris Johnson’s evidence to the Privileges Committee.

Martin Reynolds

Martin Reynolds served as Johnson's principal private secretary and featured heavily in reporting of Partygate. In May 2020, during lockdown, he emailed about 100 Downing Street staff inviting them along to socially distanced drinks outdoors.

In Johnson's evidence, the former PM says No 10 went to "great lengths to follow" Covid guidance under the direction of Reynolds. Johnson cites his former principal private secretary as someone who believed the events happening were work events.
Lee Cain served as Downing Street director of communications, and his leaving do on 13 November 2020 is one of the events Johnson addresses.

Johnson says on that occasion he "made a short speech, and left after approximately 15 minutes".

Cain is also referred to in Johnson's evidence in relation to the event on 20 May 2020, when Johnson says "Lee Cain has also raised the possibility that he raised a concern with me, although he has said that he does not recall if he did so".

Jack Doyle

Someone who gets extensive mention in the report is Jack Doyle, the former Downing Street director of communications.

It has previously been reported that Doyle made a speech to 20 or 30 people and handed out prizes at a Downing Street party just prior to Christmas 2020.

In his evidence, Johnson says it was Doyle who first made him aware of the Partygate stories ahead of their publication in the Daily Mirror in November 2021. He says when he was told there had been a party at No 10 in December 2020, he thought it was "some kind of try-on".

"It seemed implausible to me that there could have been an illegal event at No 10 almost a year earlier that I had not heard about before," he says.

"Nonetheless, I asked Jack Doyle about the event, which he confirmed he had attended."
Boris Johnson's former chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, has accused him of "misinformation" in relation to his account of a gathering in the Downing Street garden in May 2020.

Writing on his blog, Cummings repeats his claims the then-PM was told by himself and another adviser, Lee Cain, that the gathering "seemed clearly outside the rules".

In his submission, Johnson insists no-one expressed any concerns to him at the time about whether the event complied with Covid rules or guidance.

Cummings also references a line from a Times article that Johnson had rejected his claims the gathering was against the rules.

"This is not just obviously false, it's further misinformation from him," he writes.

"Officials were fined therefore the cops concluded it was against the rules, as [Lee] Cain and I warned that morning, and which is referred to in emails given to Sue Gray."

As we reported earlier, Johnson has argued Cummings should not be treated as a "credible witness" because of his "animosity towards me".
Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer says he hasn't yet seen the evidence from Boris Johnson to the Privileges Committee that has been published today.

Starmer says it is for the committee to conduct their investigation.

He was speaking at a press conference in London following the publication of a report into the Met police (follow our coverage here).
One of the key things the committee investigating Boris Johnson is looking at is how long it took him to correct some of his statements to Parliament.

This is known as "correcting the record". Each year around 100 written corrections are made by ministers who have inadvertently misled Parliament.

Boris Johnson says he corrected the record at "the earliest opportunity at which I could make the necessary correction", which, he says, was after the publication of Sue Gray's report into Downing Street gatherings on 25 May 2022.

That was almost six months after his statements about Covid rules and guidance being followed "at all times" had been made.

The committee said in its interim report that it wanted to know why "instead of correcting the record at the earliest opportunity, he declined to answer questions that were within his direct knowledge".

It said that it should have been obvious to Johnson that not all the guidance was being followed at events that he attended. Johnson disputes this.

What could happen to Johnson after Partygate hearing?
We've heard Boris Johnson's defence before he faces a panel of MPs tomorrow over allegations he misled Parliament.

Here are some possible outcomes of the Privileges Committee inquiry:

He is completely cleared of misleading Parliament - This is possible, although it does not, at this stage, seem the most likely outcome.

That is because the committee has already published a report, after gathering evidence, which identifies one statement he made which later turned out to be wrong.

He is found to have misled Parliament, is suspended and loses his seat - At the other end of the scale is the very worst case scenario for Johnson.

Firstly, the committee would have to decide that Johnson had not only misled Parliament but also that what he said had an impact on its "proper functioning". This would mean it was a "contempt".

They would also have to conclude that the contempt was so severe that they decide to recommend one of the most severe punishments available to them: suspension from Parliament for 10 sitting days or more.

He is found to have misled Parliament but gets a different punishment - If the committee does find Mr Johnson was in contempt of Parliament they will take a view on how serious it was.

Punishments could range from: asking him to make a written apology, making him apologise in person in the Commons, up to suspension.
Lib Dems: Put an end to this Tory soap opera
We are starting to get a bit of reaction to the publication of Boris Johnson's evidence to the Privileges Committee.

Liberal Democrat deputy leader Daisy Cooper says: "After countless lies, scandals and failures, it’s time to put an end once and for all to this Conservative soap opera."

We'll bring you more as it comes in, although some may be waiting for the ex-prime minister's televised grilling tomorrow before responding.
A source close to Boris Johnson has responded to the Privileges Committee - which said Johnson's final written evidence contained no new evidence and only arrived at 08:02 GMT today because the original contained "errors and typos". (See our earlier post.)

However, the source says that only a typo about a date was corrected so that the submission was fully accurate.

"It is not right to suggest that the document had errors," they said."The committee received it in its substantially complete form at 2.32pm yesterday.

"There is significant new material in the document that is new to the public domain," they add.
The Privileges Committee said evidence suggests it should have been "obvious" to Boris Johnson that Covid rules were not being following in Downing Street.

Johnson argues that if it was "obvious" to him, it would have been obvious to dozens of others who also attended gatherings. He goes on to say that the "vast majority" of people who have given evidence to the committee have indicated they did not consider their attendance broke the rules.

Screenshot from Boris Johnson's defence dossier
BBCCopyright: BBC
Johnson also writes that he does not accept the Committee has ensured a fair process in its report.

He goes on to once again question MPs' assertion that it would have been obvious to him that rules were broken.

Screenshot from Boris Johnson's defence dossier
BBCCopyright: BBC
However, the committee cited its political balance in the report, highlighting that it is made up of four Conservatives MPs, two Labour MPs, and one SNP MP - to reflect the balance in the House of Commons.

The committee report said:

Quote Message: There is a fundamental expectation that members of the committee leave their party interests at the door of the committee room and conduct their work in the interests of the House not their party. That is what each member of the committee has done in this inquiry."
There is a fundamental expectation that members of the committee leave their party interests at the door of the committee room and conduct their work in the interests of the House not their party. That is what each member of the committee has done in this inquiry."
The Privileges Committee said evidence suggests it should have been "obvious" to Boris Johnson that Covid rules were not being following in Downing Street.

Johnson argues that if it was "obvious" to him, it would have been obvious to dozens of others who also attended gatherings. He goes on to say that the "vast majority" of people who have given evidence to the committee have indicated they did not consider their attendance broke the rules.

Screenshot from Boris Johnson's defence dossier
BBCCopyright: BBC
Johnson also writes that he does not accept the Committee has ensured a fair process in its report.

He goes on to once again question MPs' assertion that it would have been obvious to him that rules were broken.

Screenshot from Boris Johnson's defence dossier
BBCCopyright: BBC
However, the committee cited its political balance in the report, highlighting that it is made up of four Conservatives MPs, two Labour MPs, and one SNP MP - to reflect the balance in the House of Commons.

The committee report said:

Quote Message: There is a fundamental expectation that members of the committee leave their party interests at the door of the committee room and conduct their work in the interests of the House not their party. That is what each member of the committee has done in this inquiry."
There is a fundamental expectation that members of the committee leave their party interests at the door of the committee room and conduct their work in the interests of the House not their party. That is what each member of the committee has done in this inquiry."
Johnson's key defence lines - and what the committee has said
We're combing through the detail of Boris Johnson's evidence dossier, which will be his defence when he goes before the Privileges Committee tomorrow.

We've highlighted some key lines from the document, including this one where he accepted that the House of Commons was misled by his statements but said they were made in good faith.

Screenshot from Boris Johnson's defence dossier
BBCCopyright: BBC
In this section of his defence, Johnson says that the allegation he was reckless to rely on assurances he received from advisers is "unprecedented and absurd" adding that it was reasonable for him, the prime minister, to do so.

Screenshot from Boris Johnson's defence dossier
BBCCopyright: BBC
Of course the committee has said that evidence "strongly suggests that breaches of guidance would have been obvious to Mr Johnson at the time he was at the gatherings".

Citing WhatsApp messages, they said:

Quote Message: There is evidence that those who were advising Mr Johnson about what to say to the press and in the House were themselves struggling to contend that some gatherings were within the rules."
There is evidence that those who were advising Mr Johnson about what to say to the press and in the House were themselves struggling to contend that some gatherings were within the rules."

Article share tools


ShareView more share options
Share this post
Copy this link
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/live/uk-politics-65025438?ns_mchannel=social&ns_source=twitter&ns_campaign=bbc_live&ns_linkname=6419a6b4ff51f554d28c1ee8%26Johnson%27s%20key%20defence%20lines%20-%20and%20what%20the%20committee%20has%20said%262023-03-21T14%3A01%3A40.558Z&ns_fee=0&pinned_post_locator=urn:asset:53399ad3-8f42-4239-99de-69ab889d0a40&pinned_post_asset_id=6419a6b4ff51f554d28c1ee8&pinned_post_type=share

Read more about these links.
Dominic Cummings 'not a credible witness' - Johnson
Dominic Cummings
ReutersCopyright: Reuters
One of the key players in Boris Johnson's No 10 team was his chief adviser Dominic Cummings.

Addressing the event on 20 May 2020 - when people were invited to "socially distanced drinks" in the No 10 garden - Boris Johnson rejects a suggestion he had been briefed by Cummings that the gathering was a breach of the rules.

"I do recall a conversation with Dominic Cummings on the afternoon of the event, but he did not mention the event, let alone express any concerns that the event would breach the rules or guidance," he says.

The former prime minister says Cummings, who left his team in November 2020, "cannot be treated as a credible witness".

"It is not clear what, if any, work the Committee has done to test the credibility of what is now said by Dominic Cummings, including his animosity towards me."

On his blog Cummings says Johnson's claim is "further misinformation from him" and repeats that he warned the event was against the rules.
he WhatsApp messages that complicate Johnson's defence
Boris Johnson says in his dossier: "The evidence before the committee demonstrates that those working at No 10 at the time shared my honest belief that the rules and guidance were being followed."

But the Privileges Committee - which is investigating him - has published evidence that contradicts this.

Its interim report earlier this month included a series of WhatsApp messages between the then director of communications and a No 10 official on 25 January 2022.

In response to a suggestion that they should describe an event as "reasonably necessary for work purposes", the director of communications says: "I’m struggling to come up with a way this one is in the rules in my head", and "not sure that one works does it. Also blows another great gaping hole in the PM’s account doesn’t it?"

There was another message from the director of communications in relation to the gathering of 19 June 2020 saying "Haven’t heard any explanation of how it’s in the rules".

In his dossier, Johnson says these are "internal messages between advisers. There is no suggestion at all that these concerns were passed on to me".

You can read more about it here.

An earlier version of this post stated the messages were sent in 2021, they were sent in 2022.
ohnson: No documents suggest I was warned events broke rules
Boris Johnson claims "there is no evidence at all that supports an allegation that I intentionally or recklessly misled the House".

He says there is "not a single document" indicating he was warned or advised that any event may have broken Covid rules or guidance.

"In fact, the evidence before the Committee demonstrates that those working at No 10 at the time shared my honest belief that the rules and guidance were being followed," he adds.

He notes the committee has been investigating for 10 months, has obtained evidence from 23 people, and had access to all of the information collated by Sue Gray.

Despite accessing a "colossal amount of contemporaneous material" he says there is "no evidence at all that supports an allegation that intentionally or recklessly misled the House".

He adds the only exception to this is the evidence provided by Dominic Cummings, who he claims is "discredited".

The Privileges Committee's interim report says evidence "strongly suggests" it would have been obvious rules were not being followed and WhatsApp messages show staff questioning if events could be considered within the rules.
I’ve just finished reading the 15,000-word submission from Boris Johnson.

Honesty time: anyone this lunchtime claiming to have ingested the subtlety of every syllable over the last hour or so is exaggerating.

But here’s the thrust of it: Boris Johnson admits he misled parliament but says it was unintentional.

He denies it was reckless or on purpose. He goes in studs up on the committee itself - saying it is unfair and partisan in its approach.

The former PM pleas for an understanding of context: an old town house with people working 18-hour days in the middle of a pandemic.

Johnson seeks to use the evidence against him - photos - as proof of his defence: they were taken by the official photographer, the view in the building was they were operating within the rules.

Clearly not everyone in the building thought so: the pictures and the stories leaked.

What will now matter to the committee - and the wider public - is two key questions:

Given the extent of the parties in No 10, is Johnson’s account credible?
And given what he said in the commons, can an intent to mislead be proven?
Johnson says it's unlikely he joked about social distancing
In his submission, Johnson responds to claims from a No 10 official that he described an event on 27 November 2020 as "probably the most unsocially distanced gathering in the UK right now".

The former prime minister says he "briefly attended" the gathering in the press office to mark the departure of a No 10 official.

"I do not believe that anything that I saw in the short period of time that I was at the gathering was contrary to the rules or guidance," he says.

Johnson claims he doesn't remember saying the words quoted by the official but says it "seems unlikely" given it was "a small and impromptu event".

He adds: "But I might well have made observations in speeches about social distancing, and whether it was being perfectly observed. That does not mean that I thought the guidance was contravened."

He argues that he did not believe the guidance required full social distancing at all times, "provided you did what you could overall".
Turning to a gathering in the Cabinet Room on 19 June 2020 - the then-prime minister's birthday - Johnson says it "never occurred to me" that the event did not comply with Covid rules or guidance until he was issued with a fixed penalty notice by police.

He says he was in the room for a work meeting and was joined by "a small gathering of people, all of whom lived or were working in the building".

"We had a sandwich lunch together and they wished me Happy Birthday," he says.

"I was not told in advance that this would happen. No cake was eaten, and no-one even sang 'happy birthday'.

"The primary topic of conversation was the response to Covid-19."
Were leaving drinks essential?
A key part of Boris Johnson’s defence is that leaving events were necessary for work purposes.

In his dossier, he says: "My view has always been that thanking and encouraging staff, and maintaining morale at No 10, was absolutely essential for work purposes."

While the guidance for England varied, at the time of one of the key gatherings it was that "only absolutely necessary participants should physically attend meetings" and they should maintain social distancing.

There was nothing in the guidance from the time that implied that leaving drinks or other forms of socialising at work were allowed.

We also learn from the committee's interim report that there was tailored guidance issued to Downing Street staff laying out the rules and guidance for their workplace, including on social distancing.

That guidance has not yet been made public.

You can read more about it here.
Johnson: Boosting morale was essential for work purposes
In his evidence, Johnson defends his attendance at an event in the No 10 garden on 20 May 2020, saying he believed it was a work event.

About 100 people were invited by email to the "socially distanced drinks" and witnesses have previously told the BBC about 30 people attended.

However, the Met Police investigation found the event did not breach rules in place at the time.

Johnson says he attended for less than half an hour, when he thanked groups of staff for their work.

"I understood this to be a socially distanced outdoor meeting to boost staff morale and teamworking after what had been a very difficult period," he says. "In my view, an opportunity to thank staff and boost morale was essential for work purposes."

The former prime minister says he had no involvement in organising the event and if he believed it broke Covid rules or guidance he would not have allowed it to go ahead.

He claims no one expressed any concerns to him at the time about whether the event complied with the rules or guidance - despite his former advisers Dominic Cummings and Lee Cain suggesting they may have
Johnson: Social distancing not always possible in 'cramped' No 10
Turning to the Covid guidance in place at the time that people should maintain social distancing in workplaces where possible, Johnson says No 10 went to "great lengths" to follow this guidance.

However, he argues "a balance had to be struck between the essential work we were doing and minimising the risk of transmission".

He describes No 10 as "an old, cramped London town house", where social distancing was not always possible.

"We tried to keep our distance, but we knew that proximity was sometimes unavoidable, and we knew that this was acceptable under the guidance," he adds.Committee investigating ex-PM says members leave party interests at door
Boris Johnson singles out the fourth report by the Committee on Privileges for criticism - saying it was "partisan" and making a number of criticisms.

The committee is made up of seven MPs which reflect the balance of the House of Commons, with four Conservatives MPs, two Labour MPs, and one SNP MP.

It is generally chaired by a member of the opposition, with Labour's Harriet Harman MP currently holding the role.

In the report Johnson is criticising, the committee say that there is a "fundamental expectation that members of the Committee leave their party interests at the door of the committee room and conduct their work in the interests of the House not their party".

"That is what each member of the Committee has done in this inquiry."Johnson argues he relied on advice of officials

Nick Eardley

Chief political correspondent

A key argument made by Boris Johnson is that he relied on the advice of officials.

Several times, he lists the discussions he had with key aides – including director of communications Jack Doyle

Johnson says he relied on their advice and had not been told rules had been broken.

The question the committee is likely to ask, however, is whether it should have been obvious.

They have previously said they think it should have been clear to him that they were being broken.

Article share tools


ShareView more share options
Share this post
Copy this link
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/live/uk-politics-65025438?ns_mchannel=social&ns_source=twitter&ns_campaign=bbc_live&ns_linkname=6419a041ff51f554d28c1edd%26Johnson%20argues%20he%20relied%20on%20advice%20of%20officials%262023-03-21T12%3A24%3A23.003Z&ns_fee=0&pinned_post_locator=urn:asset:65cfa128-2f49-4f27-a02f-679ee549b6b5&pinned_post_asset_id=6419a041ff51f554d28c1edd&pinned_post_type=share

Read more about these links.
Rule breaches at No 10 gatherings were not obvious - Johnson
Handout file photo dated 13/11/20 issued by the Cabinet Office showing the then prime minister Boris Johnson at a gathering in 10 Downing Street for the departure of a special adviser, which was released with the publication of Sue's Gray report into Downing Street parties in Whitehall during the coronavirus lockdown
PA MediaCopyright: PA Media
Boris Johnson also rejects suggestions in the committee's interim report that it would have been "obvious" to him that Covid guidance had been breached because he attended some of the gatherings himself.

He says this is "illogical" and amounts to "an allegation that I deliberately lied to Parliament".

He points out the committee's evidence includes photos of events, including several taken by the official No 10 photographer.

"A suggestion that we would have held events which were "obviously" contrary to the rules and guidance, and allowed those events to be immortalised by the official photographer is implausible," he says
Johnson's main argument: I didn't mislead MPs on purpose

Nick Eardley

Chief political correspondent

In summary, Boris Johnson is arguing Parliament may have been misled – but it wasn’t on purpose.

He goes through his understanding of various events and why he thought they were within the rules.

Johnson also makes clear his aides assured him this was the case ahead of key statements to Parliament – where he said rules were followed.

The committee however isn't on the same page; it has previously said it should have been obvious to Johnson that rules were being broken (because he set them and attended some of the events).

That is likely to be a key element of debate tomorrow when Johnson appears before the committee..
The Privileges Committee says Boris Johnson's final written evidence did not arrive until 08:02 GMT this morning because the original contained "a number of errors and typos".

More pointedly it says: "Johnson's written submission contains no new documentary evidence."
In his evidence, Boris Johnson refers to the fourth report produced by Committee on Privileges about his behaviour.

He says he does not accept the committee did all it could to ensure "fairness".

"It is important to record my disappointment at the highly partisan tone and content of the Fourth Report," he says.

"The Fourth Report appears to record findings of fact, despite the fact that the Committee has not yet heard any evidence from me."

In that report, the committee said Parliament "may have been misled" multiple times.

The evidence, it added, strongly suggested that breaches of pandemic guidance would have been "obvious" to Johnson at the time.
What exactly is the inquiry looking at?
In his evidence Boris Johnson admits the House of Commons was misled by his statements but says he made them "in good faith" and denies "intentionally or recklessly" misleading MPs.

The Privileges Committee inquiry is looking at:

What Boris Johnson said to the House of Commons
Whether what he said was correct or whether it was misleading
How quickly and comprehensively any misleading statement to the House was corrected
And if it is established the House is misled, the committee has said it will specifically look at whether this actually constituted a contempt of the House by impeding the functions of the House or tending to do so.

Quote Message: If a statement was misleading, we will consider whether that was inadvertent, reckless or intentional. If we conclude it was in any way reckless or intentional we will consider what sanction to recommend to the House. It will be for the House to decide whether to accept or reject our conclusions and recommendations."
If a statement was misleading, we will consider whether that was inadvertent, reckless or intentional. If we conclude it was in any way reckless or intentional we will consider what sanction to recommend to the House. It will be for the House to decide whether to accept or reject our conclusions and recommendations."
Johnson argues there is no evidence that supports claims he misled the Commons intentionally or recklessly - saying he relied on "trusted advisers".

He writes: "The Committee also now appears to be alleging that it was in some way reckless for me to rely on assurances that I received from trusted advisers. That allegation is unprecedented and absurd."

He adds: "I was the prime minister of the country, working day and night to manage the government's response to the Covid-19 pandemic. It was self-evidently reasonable for me to rely on assurances that I received from my advisers.

"The suggestion to the contrary would have profound and debilitating implications for the future of debate in the House, and for the ability of ministers to rely on the advice of their officials when answering questions in Parliament."
In his submission Boris Johnson accepts the Commons was misled by his statements that the rules and guidance had been followed completely at No 10.

However, he says his statements were made "in good faith and on the basis of what I honestly knew and believed at the time".

"I did not intentionally or recklessly mislead the House on 1 December 2021, 8 December 2021, or on any other date. I would never have dreamed of doing so," he adds.

Our experts are now reading the 52-page document setting out the former prime minister's evidence and we will be bringing you updates here so stick with us for analysis and updates.
We're now seeeing the substance of Johnson's defence

Nick Eardley

Chief political correspondent

Last month, the Privileges Committee said in an interim report that it believed Boris Johnson may have misled Parliament several times.

They said evidence suggested it should have been obvious to the ex-PM that Covid rules were being broken in Downing Street.

Right now we're getting a chance to see Johnson’s detailed rebuttal - and tomorrow it will be tested in a televised hearing.

Stay with us as we go through it.
The Privileges Committee investigation was commissioned last April to examine whether Boris Johnson misled MPs about what he knew about gatherings in government buildings during Covid lockdowns.

On several occasions, Johnson, who was then prime minister, told the Commons the rules had been followed. He later admitted his original statements had since proved incorrect. However, he has insisted he believed them to be true at the time and had been assured this was the case.

The seven MPs on the committee will determine whether Johnson committed a so-called "contempt" of Parliament by preventing it from doing its job of holding him to account.

They have decided that whether he intended to mislead MPs is not relevant when judging whether this offence was committed.

But if they find that it was, his intentions will be considered when deciding any punishment they recommend.

A finding that he deliberately misled MPs is likely to attract the strongest sanction.

Another option is they find he "recklessly" misled Parliament - likely producing a less severe punishment.

You can read more about the inquiry here.
Boris Johnson's reputation is on trial. His political future is on trial too. Not in a court of law. But, rather like a court of law, in front of his peers.

In this instance, the judge and jury are his fellow MPs, exploring a narrow question in relation to all those Partygate revelations.

Did he knowingly mislead parliament about them? Parliament's Privileges Committee will ask him about it on Wednesday afternoon, in front of the cameras.

At the heart of their scrutiny are three words: Inadvertent. Reckless. Intentional.

Attach the word "misleading" to these three words and we get to the crux of all this. The extent to which he was misleading and the intent.

The committee acknowledges that around 100 times a year ministers end up saying stuff in parliament that turns out to be inadvertently misleading and they come back and correct things.

So the real crunch point in all this is whether the committee establishes and concludes that he was reckless, or the more serious, but rather difficult to prove case that he intentionally misled MPs.
Prime Minister Rishi Sunak says Tory MPs will be allowed to make decisions "as individuals" on any sanctions recommended against Boris Johnson by the Commons Privileges Committee.

Sunak suggested his MPs will be given a free vote on the matter - meaning they will not be "whipped" to vote a certain way.

Ahead of the expected publication of Johnson's evidence, Sunak told BBC Breakfast: "These are matters for Parliament and the House and MPs as individuals, rather than for government. So that is the general process that we will follow."

Asked whether the PM agreed with some of Johnson’s allies that the process was a “witch hunt”, Sunak said: "That’s ultimately something for Boris Johnson and he’ll have the committee process to go through and that’s a matter for Parliament. That’s not what I’m focused on.
Johnson defence to be published before Partygate grilling
Boris Johnson's defence against claims he misled Parliament about Covid rule-breaking parties is set to be published later today.

His legal team handed a dossier of written evidence to the Privileges Committee, which is investigating the allegations, yesterday afternoon.

Since then, the committee have been reviewing the document to make any necessary redactions to protect the identity of some of the witnesses before making it public.

We're expecting that to happen today, although we don't know what time exactly.

Johnson's defence is likely to focus, at least in part, on the advice that he may have received from officials before he told Parliament the rules were adhered to.

It comes ahead of a televised session on Wednesday, when the former prime minister will be grilled by the cross-party group of MPs in person."
Doug Faulkner

BBC News

Hello and welcome to our coverage of all things political on what looks set to be a busy day in Westminster.

We are expecting former PM Boris Johnson’s evidence over Covid rule-breaking parties at Downing Street to be published by the Privileges Committee later - he's due to appear in front of them tomorrow, and we'll cover that in full detail then.

There is also reaction to a damning report into the Metropolitan Police’s culture (see our full live coverage on that here) - we're expecting a statement in the Commons from Home Secretary Suella Braverman.

And shortly the ERG group of Eurosceptic Conservative MPs are to set out their panel’s legal view on Prime Minister Rishi Sunak’s Windsor Framework - parts of which will be put to a vote in the Commons tomorrow.

Stick with us as we bring you all the developments.
By Lucy Gilder
BBC News
The UK has some of the world's most expensive childcare.

The government has announced extra help for some working parents in England - but experts warn the impact remains "highly uncertain".

Who will get 30 hours free childcare and when will it start?
In the Budget, Chancellor Jeremy Hunt said the current scheme offering some families 30 free hours of childcare per week would be extended to cover younger children.

The changes will be phased in for households in England where the parent or parents earn at least £152 a week but less than £100,000 a year:

April 2024: Eligible two-year-olds will get 15 hours of free childcare per week
September 2024: Eligible children between nine months and two years will get 15 hours
September 2025: Eligible children between nine months and three years will get 30 hours
The move could allow 60,000 more parents of young children to enter the workforce, according to the government's independent forecaster, the Office of Budget Responsibility (OBR).

But Paul Johnson, from the Institute of Fiscal Studies (IFS), said he doubted the changes would make "a big difference" and they may help only "a few tens of thousands" of parents return to work.

What other childcare help was announced?
the hourly rate paid to childcare providers for free care will increase
the 700,000 families on universal credit will get childcare support upfront, instead of having to reclaim it
people on universal credit will be able to claim £951 each month for childcare for one child and £1,630 for two - up from £646
a £600 incentive for people signing up to become childminders (or £1,200 through an agency)
Each staff member in England will also be allowed to look after five two-year-olds - up from four now - if providers wish to do so.

When this was first proposed, the government said it could save parents up to 15% - about £40 a week for a family paying £265 for 50 hours of nursery care.

But the Early Years Alliance - which represents about 14,000 childcare providers - said the "shameful decision" risked compromising safety, quality of care and staff well-being.

Mr Hunt also said the government would ensure all schools in England offer wraparound care between 08:00 and 18:00 by September 2026.

Will free childcare plan really work?
What the Budget means for you and your money
Who can get free hours childcare now and how does it work?
At the moment all three and four-year-olds are entitled to some free childcare throughout the UK. Different schemes operate in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. It must be delivered by officially-registered providers.

In England, all three and four-year-olds are entitled to 15 hours of free childcare per week in term time, or 38 weeks a year. Free hours can be used in some private nurseries or state-run pre-schools.

Children of eligible working parents are entitled to 30 free hours per week. Both parents must earn at least £152 per week on average to qualify.

At the moment two-year-olds in England can also have 15 hours of free childcare under certain circumstances, for example if the family receives universal credit.

The free hours are available from the start of the term after the child reaches the relevant age.

Not all private nurseries offer free hours, and some charge parents for extras on top, such as nappies or snacks.

What other help with childcare costs is available?
Under the tax-free childcare scheme, the government pays £2 for every £8 families contribute, up to a maximum of £2,000 per child per year (£4,000 for disabled children).

The money can be used for approved childcare including childminders, nurseries, nannies, and after-school clubs. It can be used alongside free childcare hours if parents qualify for both.

To be eligible, a parent and their partner each need to earn (on average) at least £152 a week but less than £100,000 a year.

Families claiming universal credit who aren't using the tax-free childcare scheme can claim back up to 85% of childcare costs.

Parents under 20 in England, who are at school or sixth form college, can also receive weekly payments under the Care to Learn scheme, worth £160 per child per week outside London, or £175 inside the capital.

Why more parents face losing child benefit
How expensive is childcare across the UK?
It depends on the age of the child, the number of hours and the type of care.

The average cost of full-time nursery (50 hours a week) for a child under two in Britain is nearly £15,000 a year, according to the charity Coram. Equivalent care from a childminder is nearly £13,000.

Chart showing increase in annual nursery costs for a child aged under two in Britain. Full time = 50 hours.
How does the UK compare with the rest of the world?
The UK is the third most expensive country for childcare among members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), behind Switzerland and New Zealand.

Its figures are based on a family with two children aged two and three attending nursery for at least 40 hours a week, taking into account state support.

Chart showing childcare costs by OECD country
How do childcare costs affect women?
There are no official figures on how many women no longer work as a direct result.

However, data from the Office for National Statistics says about 1.5 million women don't work due to caring responsibilities. They are part of a wider group called the "economically inactive" who are neither employed nor actively seeking work.

A 2022 survey by the Pregnant then Screwed charity reported that 43% of mothers had made them consider leaving their job because of childcare costs. Two-fifths worked fewer hours than they wanted.

The Women's Budget Group network says 1.7m women in England would do more paid work if they could.

'Childcare costs are pricing me out of job market'
Who are the millions of Britons not working?
sles of Scilly: Runaway cows and visits from Beckham - life in the world's littlest league
By Chris Evans
BBC Sport
Last updated on16 hours ago16 hours ago.
From the sectionFootball
BBC Sport Insight banner
Woolpack Wanderers and Garrison Gunners pose for a team picture
The Isles of Scilly Football League used to consist of four teams before the 1950s, but is now contested by the Woolpack Wanderers and Garrison Gunners, seen here in 2017
When Anthony Gibbons joined a Sunday morning kickabout, he didn't imagine it would lead to being David Beckham's body double.

But it turns out playing in the world's smallest league is a less predictable experience than it first appears.

The Isles of Scilly Football League consists of just two teams - the Woolpack Wanderers and Garrison Gunners. Not only do the sides face off in 18 league games each season, but they also compete in two annual cup competitions - both two-legged affairs with no away goals rule - and a Charity Shield-style exhibition.

The duopoly makes it the smallest league of its kind in the world. Technically it is an intra-club league, because both teams are registered to St Mary's, a club on the eponymously-titled island in the archipelago off the Cornish coast.

That footnote hasn't stopped global attention and a slew of star visitors though, including the day Beckham swapped Los Angeles Galaxy for the remoteness of the isles, and Gibbons swapped in to fill the former England captain's boots.

"That's my claim to fame," says Gibbons.

But being part of a uniquely familiar rivalry runs it close.

Short presentational grey line
It didn't used to be like this. Before the 1950s, there were four teams vying for glory and silverware.

But an ageing, dwindling population has put the league under pressure. Between 2011 and 2021, the number of people on the Isles of Scilly fell by 6.8%. The median age of those remaining rose from 46 to 50 years old over the same period.

Now, only the Wanderers and Gunners remain.

A player comes out of the dressing room at Garrison Field
The two teams play all their matches at Garrison Field on St Mary's
Weather permitting, the two sides do battle every Sunday morning between October and Easter on the same pitch with the same players in the same kit.

"It's considered to be a bit ridiculous and like the old cliche of 'can we play you every week?'," explains Will Lethbridge, who grew up on the islands and has played in the league for several years.

"People ask if it gets a bit boring and if it's repetitive, but it's good to have a run around and it's good fun. A large number of us are friends and have known each other since school, so it's very much the social side as much as a bit of sporting competition.

"You do know certain players well, which is their favourite foot, if they like to cut in and turn, what their strengths and weaknesses are, but there have been a few slightly testy tackles too.

"There have been a few more yellow cards this year and there's the odd confrontation, so there is some competition and a bit of needle, but there are no long-standing rivalries or punch-ups or anything like that - it's all pretty much forgiven by the time the final whistle goes."

To keep things fresh, no player has a pre-ordained team at the start of every season. Instead the two captains for that year pick new squads just as schoolchildren do on the playground, taking it in turns until there are no players left. The order of the selections are kept secret to avoid letting the last picks know when they were chosen - after all, with only 2,100 residents on the islands, the league can hardly risk putting any players' noses out of joint.

Changing the sides each year mean most players have no special affinity to one of the two teams, although Lethbridge says there are some "superstitious" stalwarts who claim to perform better for one rather than the other.

The Garrison Gunners and Woolpack Wanderers contest an aerial ball
Players are assigned afresh to one of the two teams at the start of each season
The selection process is also intended to keep sporting competition equal, although that doesn't always bear out across a whole season.

"Wanderers have tended to fair a little bit better, but that's ultimately down to who the captains pick," Lethbridge says. "This year, one of the first picks for the Gunners was expecting to be here all winter and then ended up getting a job in the Swiss Alps, so they lost their marquee signing so to speak.

"It can happen, people pick up injuries and have other commitments, but it tends to balance itself out - a team goes on a winning run of two or three games, then they lose two or three games because players are unavailable. This year, though, Wanderers had pretty much wrapped up the league four or five games before the end of the season."

The formalities were concluded with a 2-0 Wanderers victory in the 14th league meeting of the season on 5 March.

Being a small island community also means that some players are called away mid-game to deal with other issues, particularly policemen or firemen who are playing while on call. Sometimes, those impromptu absences can have a big bearing on the final outcome of a match.

"There's a guy called Dave Mumford - or Chuffer - who's a farmer and a few years ago his phone started going at half time and they said 'oi, your cows have escaped', so he had to run off to find them," explains Gibbons.

"We were 2-0 up at that point and had to go down to 10 men, so we ended up losing 3-2. In the end, it turned out they weren't even his cows."

Even with the league running on two teams, it's not unusual for player unavailability to mean one-game loans are made to even up the sides. In recent years, some games have had to be postponed because there weren't enough players.

Maintaining the necessary number of players has long been a concern for the Isles of Scilly Football League, with a lack of any further education options on the islands after the age of 16 meaning many young hopefuls move to Cornwall to continue their studies just as they're ready to play.

Some people, like Lethbridge, return to the islands when they get older and bolster the ranks, while anybody of playing age that moves to Scilly is soon approached about taking part.

It can make for a wide range of ages among the players, with a handful of over 50s playing until a few years ago and one former resident still making the occasional appearance into this 70s.

"There's always a danger [of the league running out of players]," says Gibbons. "As soon as people hit 16, they go to the mainland, so we lose about six of the kids each year, but we've been quite lucky that we've got five or six more in recent years, although the year might come when we have nobody. About five or six years ago, we were struggling because we didn't have the players and only had an eight-a-side team."

If that time does arrive, it won't be the end of football on the Isles of Scilly, though. A Boxing Day match between the veterans and an under-30s team is an annual tradition, while touring teams regularly visit to test themselves against the best players from the islets.

Each September, the Mal de Mer Sporting Club, which takes its name for the French for seasickness, cross over from the mainland to go up against the locals in a multi-sport competition, including darts, gig rowing, beach volleyball and, of course, football.

Lyonesse Trophy
The Isles of Scilly is home to the world's smallest trophy as well as the world's smallest football league
There's also the Lyonesse Trophy, a semi-regular match against Penzance amateur side Dynamo Choughs to win what is dubbed as the world's smallest cup, measuring up at barely one centimetre tall. The novelty silverware grabbed the attention of Fifa, with the world governing body negotiating for the trophy to be displayed in its official museum in Zurich.

"We started playing Dynamo Choughs on our football tours in the early 2000s and one of their players is a metal worker, so he decided to make the smallest trophy he could," Gibbons explains.

"When Fifa came over and said it'd be great in their museum, he made a replica and they've got it at the moment. Even though it's only about one centimetre tall, people have still tried to put beer in there when they've won it, but it's not a big drink."

Gibbons and Secretary Matt Simons were treated to a VIP trip to Fifa's Zurich headquarters in February to see the cup displayed in all its glory and agree a deal to loan the Lyonesse Trophy to the museum for another five years.

Scilly's footballers are growing accustomed to the attention and regularly play host to journalists and TV crews from all over the world.

The league also captures the imagination of some of the globe's biggest brands. Vodafone used the island as the base for a 2019 advertising campaign that featured Far (Fan Assistant Referee) - a crowd-sourced 5G video review system which allowed other Isles of Scilly residents to view and vote on controversial refereeing decisions remotely.

But nothing has yet topped 2007 when sportswear manufacturer Adidas flew in a tranche of international stars as part of its Dream Big campaign.

Michael Ballack
Germany and Chelsea's Michael Ballack flies into the Isles of Scilly to film an advert in 2007
Beckham, Steven Gerrard, Patrick Vieira, Anderson, Daniele de Rossi and Michael Ballack arrived on the islands to put young footballers through their paces, before relaxing on the beach and eating fish and chips.

Other, less welcome, visitors soon followed.

"A guy from St Martin's phoned the press to say Beckham was here, so a load of helicopters came over and he had to go, remembers Gibbons.

"They still needed one last shot over the bay so I filled in for Beckham."

"Someone did send a message to the production company to see if they wanted to do a revisit recently, but I don't think there's been a response," Lethbridge adds.

"We do get odd things come up and usually we'll find some time to do it because it's all good fun and it's good for Scilly because the islands rely on tourism and wanting people to come here and visit us, so any exposure helps with that."

It makes for a competition that's undeniably repetitive, but far from boring.
Charles Bronson could be ready for release, says former prison officer
Published
1 day ago

Share

Media caption,
Roy Kirk was Charles Bronson's prison officer when the notorious inmate took a hostage at HMP Hull

By Pritti Mistry
BBC News
Known by many as "Britain's most violent prisoner", Charles Bronson has spent almost 50 years in jail. The armed robber turned artist, now 70, is awaiting a decision by the Parole Board on whether he can be freed. One man who knows him better than most is former prison officer Roy Kirk, who was assigned to look after him for almost a decade.

The first time the 21-year-old officer clapped eyes on Charles Bronson, the well-built prisoner was clad only in his underpants and smeared with faeces while snarling at a small army of guards.

Roy Kirk had been sent to collect Bronson from a segregation unit at a prison in Liverpool and transport him across the country to his new home in HMP Hull.

But, as ever with the former bare-knuckle boxer, things were not always as simple as they could be.

Mr Kirk said the group of officers, clad in riot gear and using protective shields, had managed to lever open the door to Bronson's cell, extricate him and guide him to a shower.

"There wasn't an inch of the walls that never had faeces everywhere," Mr Kirk said of the mid-1980s encounter.

"I said to him, 'you don't need to be living like an animal for the rest of your life - you can make changes, you've still got time to do that'."

Charles Bronson
IMAGE SOURCE,GETTY IMAGES
Image caption,
Charles Bronson, who uses the name Charles Salvador, was first jailed in 1974
The officer immediately got a taste of Bronson's unpredictability.

"He winks at me, turns around and pulls the full shower fitting out of the wall - it's about 4ft long - and then he threw it on the floor and laughed, and said, 'get me in the van'."

When the pounding of Mr Kirk's heart abated, he was at the start of what would become one of the prison system's most unusual friendships.

Born Michael Peterson in Luton, Bedfordshire, in December 1952, Charles Bronson took the name of the Death Wish movie actor in the 1980s.

By the time he got to HMP Hull, Bronson, who changed his surname to Salvador in 2014, was on the way to becoming notorious in the jail system.

But Mr Kirk said he saw a different side, describing the man who reportedly did 2,000 push-ups a day as "always pleasant, polite".

'House on fire'
During the time Bronson, who was played by Tom Hardy in the eponymous 2009 film, was in Hull he learnt basic skills such as cooking and washing, while sharing his physical training knowledge.

Mr Kirk recalled his charge as having a sense of humour which was "second to none".

"We got on like a house on fire. I stuck up for him when I felt necessary."

Mr Kirk spent time in the gym with Bronson, with the pair boxing and lifting weights together.

"I'd sit on his shoulders with his head between my legs and he'd do 50 press-ups as a warm-up with me sat on his back. I always used to think, 'he's like a machine'.

"I've never been as fit because he was like a mentor in the gym," the now 58-year-old former officer recalled.

Tom Hardy with a poster for the movie Bronson
IMAGE SOURCE,DAVE M. BENETT/GETTY
Image caption,
Actor Tom Hardy alongside a poster advertising the Bronson film
Bronson was first jailed aged 22 in 1974 for armed robbery and wounding. He has spent most of his life in jail since, as a result of attacks on staff and inmates, violent protests as well as a series of nine hostage-takings which involved a total of 11 victims.

At one of his trials, he described himself as a "very nasty man" in the past.

Mr Kirk recalled how, shortly after teaching him to cook, Bronson asked prison staff for their opinion on some chips he had prepared.

His fellow officers, wary of the prisoner's volatile persona, declined to tell the truth and attempted to placate him with praise.

"They all said it were great and he came to me last and said, 'what do you think?'

"I spat it out and said, 'they're absolutely awful'.

After thanking Mr Kirk for his honesty, Bronson confronted the same staff "screaming and shouting and frothing in their faces for lying to him".

"It was those types of behaviours that kept people on their toes," Mr Kirk, who now runs a children's home in Hull, remembered.

Charles Bronson
IMAGE SOURCE,PA
Image caption,
In 1994, Bronson held a deputy governor hostage in a violent siege
While Bronson could have a wicked sense of humour and get along with people, the other side of his personality manifested itself in one terrifying incident.

In April 1994, Bronson took the jail's deputy governor, Adrian Wallace, hostage.

Mr Kirk said as a result of good behaviour, Bronson had been told he could see family and friends in London.

The visit never happened, leaving the atmosphere around Bronson "extremely heightened".

Following a brief exchange of words, he dragged Mr Wallace out of the kitchen into a TV room with reinforced glass, "carrying him by the throat in one hand, with his feet off the floor".

"I ran across, got probably within about 10ft of him," Mr Kirk said.

"Charlie put his hand on the side of his head - [deputy governor's] still off the floor - and said, 'one more step and I'll just snap his neck here and now'."

Mr Kirk tried negotiating with Bronson, who had lashed the terrified official to a chair with his own key chain.

Letter from HMP Hull
Image caption,
In a thank you letter, Roy Kirk is praised for not flinching and showing "remarkable stamina" in the face-to-face confrontation with Bronson
The deputy governor was repeatedly attacked by Bronson, who punched him in the face and then picked him up by his hair.

As the room crackled with tension, Bronson, surrounded by guards and a special "intervention" squad, issued a ransom demand of a helicopter and two portions of fish and chips.

"He was walking up and down with the radio on talk-through, marching like a soldier, singing at the top of his voice, 'now the end is near and we draw the final curtain' like he was going to kill him at the end of the song.

"You're stood there the whole time, heart in your hand. You don't know what to do for the best."

Five hours later, Mr Kirk had an opportunity to tackle Bronson who, while wearing a shield fashioned from curtains and cushions, fell over debris as he dragged his victim to another room.

Within seconds of the intervention, the deputy governor was saved - but Mr Kirk was injured.

"I was knelt on him, hitting him, trying to hold him until people arrived, but he got to his feet. Then we fell to the floor.

"Sadly, in that time my leg had been snapped. He rolled over and fell through my knee. I was staggered at the power."

Mr Wallace was off work for five weeks due to the injuries inflicted by Bronson.

'A risk in society'
Mr Kirk believed it was Bronson's volatile behaviour coupled with the prison service's "false promises" that fuelled the violent siege.

Looking back at his time in the system, he said despite the inmate's extreme violence he had also been failed by the prison service at times.

"He's always going to be volatile.

"He'll always have that side. But you could say that about other offenders.

"They're still a risk in society."

Extract from Charles Bronson book
Image caption,
An extract from Charles Bronson's book, in which he describes Mr Kirk as "one of the best blokes" he has ever met
The question of whether Bronson should be freed on parole is one Mr Kirk is happy to answer, but recognises the differing views.

He said offenders like Bronson should be supported - though accepted it would be "extremely difficult for him" to be reintegrated into society.

"I was very close to Charlie, like I would be with anybody I've worked with daily, [I] kept professional distance and boundaries. But we'd become very good friends," he added.

Mr Kirk said he was thinking of writing a book about his experiences and hoped to once again meet Bronson, who is currently at HMP Woodhill in Milton Keynes.

"I hope he does get released. I'd like to go and see him if at all possible."

Presentational grey line
Follow BBC East Yorkshire and Lincolnshire on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Send your story ideas to yorkslincs.news@bbc.co.uk.

Related Topics
Hull
Parole Board
Milton Keynes
Long Reads
More on this story
Who is notorious prisoner Charles Bronson?
9 March
Charles Bronson
Bronson has 'not done himself any favours' - son
9 March
Charles Bronson
From other local news sites
Police divers searching River Freshney for 'firearm'
External
Grimsby Live
Family of 'wonderful' Leeds man who died after fall in St James's Hospital seeking compensation from NHS Trust
External
Yorkshire Evening Post
Emmerdale stars enjoy relaxing spa break at Grimsby's Laceby Manor
External
Grimsby Live
Yorkshire mum who diagnosed with cancer while pregnant to star in TV advert
External
Yorkshire Post
Yorkshire restaurants and cafes given one star hygiene ratings in the last year in need of major improvement
External
Yorkshire Post
Deer Park Roundhay filming: Film crews take over Leeds pub filming new series of Channel 4's Hullraisers